<div id="mw-page-base" class="noprint" markdown="1">

</div>

<div id="mw-head-base" class="noprint" markdown="1">

</div>

<div id="content" class="mw-body" markdown="1" role="main">

<span id="top"></span>

<div id="siteNotice" markdown="1">

</div>

<div class="mw-indicators" markdown="1">

</div>

# <span class="mw-page-title-main">Genius checklist</span> [firstHeading]

<div id="bodyContent" class="vector-body" markdown="1">

<div id="siteSub" class="noprint" markdown="1">

From supermemo.guru

</div>

<div id="contentSub" markdown="1">

<div id="mw-content-subtitle" markdown="1">

</div>

</div>

<div id="contentSub2" markdown="1">

</div>

<div id="jump-to-nav" markdown="1">

</div>

<a href="#mw-head" class="mw-jump-link">Jump to navigation</a>
<a href="#searchInput" class="mw-jump-link">Jump to search</a>

<div id="mw-content-text" class="mw-body-content mw-content-ltr"
markdown="1" lang="en" dir="ltr">

<div class="mw-parser-output" markdown="1">

<span class="small">This article by Dr [Piotr
Wozniak](/wiki/Piotr_Wozniak "Piotr Wozniak") is part of [SuperMemo
Guru](/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru "SuperMemo Guru") series on memory, learning,
creativity, and problem solving.</span>

<div id="toc" class="toc" markdown="1" role="navigation"
aria-labelledby="mw-toc-heading">

<div class="toctitle" markdown="1" lang="en" dir="ltr">

## Contents [mw-toc-heading]

<span class="toctogglespan"></span>

</div>

-   [<span class="tocnumber">1</span> <span class="toctext">How to
    become a genius</span>](#How_to_become_a_genius)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.1</span> <span
        class="toctext">Eliminate stress</span>](#Eliminate_stress)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.2</span> <span
        class="toctext">Sleep</span>](#Sleep)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.3</span> <span
        class="toctext">Self-discipline</span>](#Self-discipline)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.4</span> <span class="toctext">Learn
        day and night</span>](#Learn_day_and_night)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.5</span> <span
        class="toctext">Abstract knowledge</span>](#Abstract_knowledge)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.6</span> <span
        class="toctext">Knowledge
        representation</span>](#Knowledge_representation)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.7</span> <span
        class="toctext">Health</span>](#Health)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.8</span> <span
        class="toctext">Negative emotion</span>](#Negative_emotion)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.9</span> <span
        class="toctext">Optimism and
        patience</span>](#Optimism_and_patience)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.10</span> <span class="toctext">The
        Goal</span>](#The_Goal)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.11</span> <span
        class="toctext">Balance learning and
        productivity</span>](#Balance_learning_and_productivity)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.12</span> <span
        class="toctext">Passion</span>](#Passion)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.13</span> <span
        class="toctext">Specialization vs.
        versatility</span>](#Specialization_vs._versatility)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.14</span> <span
        class="toctext">Measure the day</span>](#Measure_the_day)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.15</span> <span
        class="toctext">Forget money</span>](#Forget_money)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.16</span> <span class="toctext">Write
        down ideas</span>](#Write_down_ideas)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.17</span> <span
        class="toctext">Brainstorming</span>](#Brainstorming)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.18</span> <span
        class="toctext">Time-management</span>](#Time-management)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.19</span> <span class="toctext">Study
        great people</span>](#Study_great_people)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.20</span> <span class="toctext">Study
        yourself</span>](#Study_yourself)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.21</span> <span class="toctext">Work
        your social skills</span>](#Work_your_social_skills)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.22</span> <span class="toctext">Slug
        it out</span>](#Slug_it_out)
    -   [<span class="tocnumber">1.23</span> <span class="toctext">Warm
        family</span>](#Warm_family)
-   [<span class="tocnumber">2</span> <span class="toctext">Why do
    people fail my
    prescription?</span>](#Why_do_people_fail_my_prescription?)

</div>

<span class="small">Compiled on the basis of the original list presented
here: *<a href="http://super-memory.com/articles/genius.htm"
class="external text">Roots of genius and creativity</a>*, [Piotr
Wozniak](/wiki/Piotr_Wozniak "Piotr Wozniak") (2001)</span>

## <span id="How_to_become_a_genius" class="mw-headline">How to become a genius</span>

A majority of people carry the potential to become a genius. There are
factors that are far [more important than genes and
IQ](/wiki/Simple_formula_for_high_intelligence "Simple formula for high intelligence").
I have compiled a checklist that I believe should work, when followed.
All you need to begin with is to be free and reasonably healthy. I try
to list the factors that prevent many people from accomplishing their
greatest potential. The list begins with the stumbling blocks that are
most likely to occur on one's road to genius. Some factors need to be
balanced against each other, and some factors overlap. For example, the
first three preconditions of genius are strongly related: freedom from
[stress](/wiki/Stress_resilience "Stress resilience"), [good
sleep](/wiki/Science_of_sleep "Science of sleep"), and
<a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">self-discipline</a>. They may provide the key to
answering why we are not (yet) a planet of geniuses. I listed individual
points separately on the basis of their ability to motivate and inspire.
Before you start reading, however, remember what Herbert Simon said
about genius: it takes about ten years to develop it. Not only will you
have to meet all the criteria listed below, but lots of hard work and
patience will be required before you climb that summit!

<div class="bs-callout bs-callout-highlight" markdown="1">

If you follow these rules religiously, you will be amazed by how much
progress you can make in a decade

</div>

If I scare you with a decade-long time-frame, remember that chances are
good that you will love your self-transformation in weeks. The younger
you are, the 'messier' your life, the less you know about your future,
the more powerful the effect.

### <span id="Eliminate_stress" class="mw-headline">Eliminate stress</span>

Stress is understood here as rapid change resulting in an increase in
stress hormones (catecholamines, ACTH, cortisol, etc.). Stressful change
can come from conflict, illness, the death of a relative, or
unemployment. Stress can also result from seemingly happy events such as
a wedding or a hasty vacation. A simple test here is to make sure that
creative problems circulate in your mind while you are brushing your
teeth. You will fail the test if, instead of creative thinking, you are
preoccupied with problems at work or in the family. Stress will
dramatically cut down your creative efficiency. Most of all, it will
affect your <a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">self-discipline</a>: another cornerstone of
genius. In addition, [chronic
stress](/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress") will result in excess
cortisol, increased activity in the sympathetic system, and a resulting
inhibition of neurogenesis, memory consolidation, creativity, and more.
See: [Stress resilience](/wiki/Stress_resilience "Stress resilience"),
[chronic stress](/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress"), [acute
stress](/wiki/Acute_stress "Acute stress"),
[eustress](/wiki/Eustress "Eustress"), and
<a href="/wiki/Simple_formula_for_a_happy_life" class="mw-redirect"
title="Simple formula for a happy life">Simple formula for a happy
life</a>

<div class="bs-callout bs-callout-highlight" markdown="1">

[Chronic stress](/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress") steals creative
time, ruins sleep, and is bad for the brain

</div>

### <span id="Sleep" class="mw-headline">Sleep</span>

Make sure to always get as much quality sleep as [your brain
requires](/wiki/Free_running_sleep "Free running sleep"). The simplest
first step is: [throw away your alarm
clock](/wiki/Kill_the_alarm_clock "Kill the alarm clock")! Lack of sleep
delivers a quadruple whammy: (1) it suppresses [memory
consolidation](/wiki/Memory_consolidation "Memory consolidation"), (2)
it prevents [memory
optimization](/wiki/Memory_optimization_in_sleep "Memory optimization in sleep"),
(3) it makes you unwilling to exert mental effort, and (4) it undermines
your <a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">self-discipline</a>. In the long run, bad sleep
is bad for brain health. Submit to the [natural creativity
cycle](/wiki/Natural_creativity_cycle "Natural creativity cycle"). For
more see: [Science of sleep](/wiki/Science_of_sleep "Science of sleep")

<div class="bs-callout bs-callout-highlight" markdown="1">

Bad sleep undermines [stress
resilience](/wiki/Stress_resilience "Stress resilience"), learning, and
[creativity](/wiki/Creativity "Creativity")

</div>

### <span id="Self-discipline" class="mw-headline">Self-discipline</span>

Lack of self-discipline aggravated by stress and a lack of sleep is the
number one cause of low productivity. The trick to achieving good
self-discipline is to make incremental progress, and convert discipline
into a habit and then into the pleasure of productivity (for more see:
<a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">Self-discipline</a>). If you develop healthy
self-discipline habits early, your life is likely to take an entirely
different course. If you believe you are lacking in this field, try the
following exercise: as soon as a valuable activity comes to your mind
that you are really unwilling to do, **do it**. Within the scope and in
agreement with human biology, your rational brain must be the master of
your decision making. Stand over a pool of cold water. Do you hate
jumping in? The more you hate it, the sooner you should jump. And in the
end you will <a href="/wiki/Winter_swimming" class="mw-redirect"
title="Winter swimming">love it</a>. A cold shower is a minor
inconvenience once you experience the volitional power of the brain. You
need to master the skill of perfect execution of your own plans. The
more precise your plan, the harder it is to execute, yet the more
tangible the results. Learn to delay gratification. If you focus on your
long-term goals, your daily inconveniences will be more bearable or even
pleasurable. A strenuous quest towards the goal is the best reward for a
genius mind. Minor awards of laziness do not befit a true genius. Think
of self-discipline daily. Even the strongest minds can relax it all too
easily. Remember about stress and sleep. Stress and sleepiness are chief
factors that undermine self-discipline. Self-discipline cannot quarrel
with biology. In extreme cases, it can actually [undermine your
genius](/wiki/War_of_the_networks "War of the networks"). If you are
sick, stop working. If you are sleepy, go to sleep. For comfort, you
should know, that with each passing year, self-discipline will gradually
transform into a pleasure. Not only will you [execute your plans
instinctively](/wiki/Plan "Plan"), you will also reap the benefits of
your earlier efforts to steer your life in a good direction. In later
years, you will not need much
<a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">self-discipline</a> to employ your genius mind
to do good things.

<div class="bs-callout bs-callout-highlight" markdown="1">

<a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">Self-discipline</a> is easy when it emerges from
passionate goals

</div>

### <span id="Learn_day_and_night" class="mw-headline">Learn day and night</span>

Knowledge is the substance you [convert to great
ideas](/wiki/How_to_solve_any_problem%3F "How to solve any problem?").
Although it is possible to learn in stress or in a [sleep
deficit](/wiki/Sleep_deprivation "Sleep deprivation"), learning is
listed here behind stress, sleep and self-discipline. This is because
humans exhibit [inborn curiosity](/wiki/Learn_drive "Learn drive") that
makes them crave learning. TV, tabloid press, and social media thrive on
this need for learning. Most people understand the importance of
learning but are prevented from executing their plans due to stress,
lack of sleep or lack of self-discipline. To breed genius, your whole
life should revolve around learning. You should use every single little
opportunity to learn important things. This could be reading Einstein's
biography or talking with a homeless person. Read, talk, watch, surf,
and keep on thinking. Do not avoid hard subjects (e.g. mathematics).
Mold your learning strictly to your creative needs, but do not fail to
explore a wide range of topics. Touch all the bases and avoid tunnel
vision! Remember that your success in learning will require appropriate
<a href="/wiki/20_rules" class="mw-redirect" title="20 rules">knowledge
representation</a> and timing of review (as in
[SuperMemo](/wiki/SuperMemo "SuperMemo")). Are you lacking a university
education? [Never mind](/wiki/School_dropouts "School dropouts"). Look
at Edison, Lincoln, or Leibnitz to see the power of
[self-instruction](/wiki/Self-learning "Self-learning"). All the
seemingly contradictory requirements listed above can be reconciled if
you structure your learning with [incremental
reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading"). See:
[Advantages of incremental
reading](/wiki/Advantages_of_incremental_reading "Advantages of incremental reading")

### <span id="Abstract_knowledge" class="mw-headline">Abstract knowledge</span>

Except for a great deal of learning, you will need to pay attention to
the [quality of
knowledge](/wiki/Abstract_knowledge "Abstract knowledge") and its
general [applicability](/wiki/Applicability "Applicability"). You cannot
just memorize thousands of facts. You have to consciously explore areas
such as logic, probability, statistics, game theory, decision theory,
computing sciences, optimization, as well as other branches of
mathematics and sciences. You have to develop a love for logical
thinking, the scientific method, and skepticism. Even if you are a movie
critic, you will still need quality logic to frame your judgment.
Remember that all knowledge is volatile and may be subject to
falsification at any time. Keep your mind open to new truths even if
they seem to turn your present vision of the world upside down

### <span id="Knowledge_representation" class="mw-headline">Knowledge representation</span>

The main thing that makes a genius brain stand out is its ability to
store [quality knowledge](/wiki/Coherence "Coherence") in a way that is
<a href="/wiki/20_rules" class="mw-redirect" title="20 rules">easy to
remember</a> and [easy to use](/wiki/Applicability "Applicability"). A
genius mind can see complex things in a simple form. It looks at the
same text or picture and sees a dozen times more than an average
individual. An average reader will say: *"I understand, so what?"*. A
genius reader will say: *"Eureka!"*, and list several applications of
the just acquired piece of knowledge. Geniuses simplify while learning.
They [generalize](/wiki/Generalization "Generalization"). They build
[abstract models](/wiki/Abstract_knowledge "Abstract knowledge"). They
develop abstract languages for representing knowledge. Those
representation skills can also be developed by training. Have you ever
tried to learn Kanji (Japanese language symbols)? If you see Kanji as a
tangle of confused sticks, you are a typical beginner. Over time,
however, Kanji symbols should begin to sing to you and talk to you in
their own language. Once you pass the first few hundred, the next
thousand should go smoothly. The same happens if you learn the 20x20
multiplication table. With time you learn simple tricks for running
simple and repetitive calculations. Instead of memorizing 20x20
combinations, you limit yourself to a standard 10x10 table (just 25% of
all combinations) and add to this a few rules for manipulating numbers
in your [working memory](/wiki/Working_memory "Working memory"). The
best way to develop good representations is to (1) understand the way
the memory works (see:
<a href="/wiki/20_rules" class="mw-redirect" title="20 rules">20 rules
of formulating knowledge</a>), (2) consciously modify representations in
the learning process (e.g. [incremental
reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading") supports this
process naturally) (3) work on [abstract
knowledge](/wiki/Abstract_knowledge "Abstract knowledge") (the more you
learn the easier it becomes), and (4) get
<a href="/wiki/Good_sleep" class="mw-redirect" title="Good sleep">good
sleep</a> to employ [neural optimization in
sleep](/wiki/Neural_optimization_in_sleep "Neural optimization in sleep").
If you encounter a difficult problem in [incremental
reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading"), postpone it.
With luck, some other information source will present to you a better
representation that is easier to assimilate.

### <span id="Health" class="mw-headline">Health</span>

Take obsessive care of your health! Keep your blood pressure down (high
blood pressure damages your brain), do not
<a href="/wiki/Impact_of_alcohol_on_sleep" class="mw-redirect"
title="Impact of alcohol on sleep">abuse alcohol</a> (any dose that
visibly affects your mental performance may be poisonous to your brain),
use medication only when absolutely necessary, exercise, stay away from
smoking or illicit drugs, learn medical sciences! Your brain is a highly
sensitive organ that needs a healthy environment to operate in. Health
and understanding of the biological needs of your brain may dramatically
affect your performance in the long run. Don't waste time on [colds and
flu](/wiki/Formula_for_common_cold_prevention "Formula for common cold prevention").
Modern world is an assault on our health. Knowledge is the best
prevention. By relying on natural physiological defense mechanisms, you
stand a good chance to stay healthy till your seventies or beyond. See:
<a href="/wiki/Simple_formula_for_a_happy_life" class="mw-redirect"
title="Simple formula for a happy life">Simple formula for a happy
life</a>

### <span id="Negative_emotion" class="mw-headline">Negative emotion</span>

Learn to control and eliminate negative emotions that blur your mind and
long-term vision. The only acceptable feelings towards others should be
positive, in particular love, compassion, admiration, and inspiration.
Intellectual passion is ok too. If other negative feelings tend to creep
in, emigrate into your creative world. Don't get swayed or discouraged
by the nasty things in life. Ride on regardless.

### <span id="Optimism_and_patience" class="mw-headline">Optimism and patience</span>

Drive your life into an optimistic track! Do what you love and develop a
strong sense of purpose. Optimism and patience rooted in
<a href="/wiki/Stoicism" class="mw-redirect" title="Stoicism">stoic</a>
philosophy are critical for your brain to peacefully engage in a
creative effort. Optimism has a hormonal basis and as such can be
manipulated and enhanced. It is also based on memory (see: [Learning and
depression](/wiki/Learning_and_depression "Learning and depression")).
Things that you love doing should find a place in your schedule. Due to
its intimate and direct impact on the reward system, efficient learning
belongs to the best sources of a positive experience. However, to many
it can also be
[drudgery](/wiki/Problem_of_Schooling "Problem of Schooling"). For
counterbalance you need to find time for highly enjoyable activities
that widen your enthusiasm for living in general, be it music, art,
movies, sports, religion, love, or other.

### <span id="The_Goal" class="mw-headline">The Goal</span>

Even the smartest, most knowledgeable brain does not deserve the status
of genius if it lives in a vacuum. If you switch your focus and
interests indefinitely, you may end up with little creative output to
show for your talents. Establishing a clear goal for your life should be
a priority. If you are very young and still do not understand yourself
or the surrounding world, you can safely commit yourself to enhanced
learning. Until your goals crystallize, learning itself may be your
temporary goal. However, you cannot continue learning for the learning's
sake indefinitely. At some point you need to focus on a big goal and
your learning should be focused on achieving that goal. Good goals
emerge naturally, and are a reflection of your talents and values. What
do you think is the best thing you could do to make the world a better
place? If you know it, make it your obsession. The greatest minds in
history tended to focus intensely on a single problem and neglect all
minor things in life. Young Bill Gates would sleep under his desk
because he did not want to waste time on coming back home. David Boise,
Al Gore's star lawyer, would live in a dirty house and run in worn-out
suits to economize more time on getting prepared for his cases. Lincoln
would dress nicely only to please his wife. Einstein became entirely
irresponsive to the outside world once he focused on his relativistic
ideas. Edison would work for days nearly without sleep. Andy Grove of
Intel stated justly: *"Only paranoid survive!"*. You need a clear goal
and you need to pursue it passionately. As for Gates and Edison,
remember that [quality sleep](/wiki/Science_of_sleep "Science of sleep")
was listed second on this checklist. A passionate genius may sleep less,
but this will only be harmless if it comes naturally on demand in the
heat of creation. See: <a href="/wiki/Setting_goals" class="mw-redirect"
title="Setting goals">Setting goals</a>

<div class="bs-callout bs-callout-highlight" markdown="1">

Goals and passions emerge naturally in a healthy brain free from major
stressors

</div>

### <span id="Balance_learning_and_productivity" class="mw-headline">Balance learning and productivity</span>

On the one hand, this checklist asks you to work hard to achieve your
goals. On the other hand, it asks you to spend your whole life on
learning. Naturally, you need to find an optimum balance between
learning and productive creativity. This is what Steven Covey calls P/PC
ratio (i.e. the ratio of effort put into production as opposed to
developing the production capacity). A simple rule of thumb is: start
with allocating your time fifty-fifty to learning and creativity.
Gradually, you will see where the bottlenecks develop and you can change
your allocation (in [SuperMemo](/wiki/SuperMemo "SuperMemo"), you can
use [Tools : Plan](/wiki/Plan "Plan") to find your perfect proportion).
Each time you swing away from the optimum balance, your productive
output will be diminished. Your genius cannot be like a pink Cadillac in
a glass showcase. Neither can you neglect developing genius while
pursuing your goals. These two go hand in hand.

### <span id="Passion" class="mw-headline">Passion</span>

Passion, ambition, motivation, energy, and persistence are all
interconnected. The inner drive and the [rage to
master](/wiki/Rage_to_master "Rage to master") are preconditions of true
genius. The bad news is that those factors are strongly interwoven with
your personality and some have a genetic background. The good news is
that you are probably already sufficiently endowed. After all, you found
this text and you have enough patience to work through it. Even better
news is that [passion involves
memory](/wiki/Passion_and_memory "Passion and memory"), and as such it
is trainable. For some hints see how the [learn
drive](/wiki/Learn_drive "Learn drive") can be suppressed or enhanced
in: [Schools suppress the learn
drive](/wiki/Schools_suppress_the_learn_drive "Schools suppress the learn drive").
If your drive to learn thrives, your knowledge explodes. This in turn
adds strength to passion, then motivation, then energy, and persistence.
Passion dies from inaction. On the other hand, health permitting,
passion grows with productive efforts combined with unceasing
self-development.

### <span id="Specialization_vs._versatility" class="mw-headline">Specialization vs. versatility</span>

On the one hand, this checklist asks you to specialize in a narrow area
in which you can become number one in the world. On the other hand, it
asks you to never neglect wide multi-disciplinary learning. Naturally
you need to balance the two. There is no better way to balance your
learning priorities than [incremental
reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading") where
knowledge grows dendritically and spreads in all directions that bring
value. Each time you discover painful gaps in your knowledge, you can
add in more material to incremental reading. Incremental reading puts no
limit on how much material you can import into the learning process and
it makes it possible to spend only as much time on learning as you can
afford. You cannot overload incremental reading. If you add more
biology, all other subjects will proportionally be compressed in
priority. This also makes sure that you do not break down under a load
of a temporary fad. Subjects that decline in priority can be rescheduled
and re- / deprioritized. Reprioritization occurs continually during the
learning process. In incremental reading, you nearly do not need to
allocate time for planning the learning process. Your prioritization can
go concurrently. You will not belong to those people who lose their
chance for success by spreading everything too thin. Neither will you
develop tunnel vision. With rationally controlled learning, you will
easily find an optimum balance between specialization and the big
picture and all that falls in-between.

### <span id="Measure_the_day" class="mw-headline">Measure the day</span>

Measure your progress by your daily effort and not the distance
remaining to the ultimate goal. Only with this paradoxical approach will
you be able to follow the optimum trajectory. For one, today's effort is
more tangible than the tiny difference a day often makes on your road.
Productivity is the most satisfying feeling that will drive you to your
greatest heights. Sensing productivity may be the most important
positive emotion of a creative mind. As long as you derive your primary
satisfaction from the perfect execution of your plans that lead to the
big goal, your motivation will remain high and your trajectory correct.
Occasionally, your genius may end up unfulfilled as it was with Charles
Babbage's differential machine or Ted Nelson's Xanadu. But this is no
excuse for not trying. This [wiki
site](/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru "SuperMemo Guru") uses transclusion that has
been based on Nelson's genius thinking. It is also being written on a
computer inspired by Babbage's pioneering designs. See also: [Planning a
perfect productive day without
stress](/wiki/Planning_a_perfect_productive_day_without_stress "Planning a perfect productive day without stress")

### <span id="Forget_money" class="mw-headline">Forget money</span>

Money distorts goals. If you follow the money trail, you will optimize
against creativity! Money-oriented optimization, at least in today's
world, will prevent you from developing a clear creative focus. Very few
true geniuses were motivated by money. Most were motivated by
utilitarian goals, [curiosity](/wiki/Learn_drive "Learn drive"), or the
quest to be the best in their field. You need to bend your creativity
down to earth only as much as to ensure this checklist is left untouched
(esp. in points related to health, stress, sleep, and time for creative
effort). For comfort you should keep in mind that the Bill Gates'es of
the future will be recruited from the creative elite. All nations work
in concert to develop planetary mechanisms for rewarding geniuses for
their invaluable effort. Genius's sole job and responsibility is to
create and contribute value.

### <span id="Write_down_ideas" class="mw-headline">Write down ideas</span>

Never trust your memory to keep your new ideas. Once you come up with an
idea, write it down instantly. Write it down even when it is only a hint
as to how to solve a problem. Write it down even if you are not sure if
it is correct. You cannot predict how your hint or a shadow of an idea
will affect your future thinking. If the idea seems weak, so is its
memory trace. Charles Babbage said: Write down the thoughts of the
moment. Those that come unsought for are commonly the most valuable.
Graham Bell kept meticulous notes of his ideas that collectively could
help Bell break Edison's patent record. Botvinnik kept meticulous notes
of his chess game ideas and encouraged his students to follow the same
practice. Bohr's office had a wall with a narrow drawer in which he
would keep multiple manuscripts in various stages of preparation for
publication. He would not hurry the creative process, but always wanted
to preserve the current state of thinking. Today, the best way to follow
Bell and Bohr is to write down nuggets of ideas straight into the
[incremental reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading")
process. Once you write down an idea, describe all the associations of
the moment. Gradually, in the incremental review process, you will
reanalyze individual pieces, build upon them, consolidate, enhance with
new knowledge, etc. In the process of incremental reading, add new ideas
to topics that sparked them. This will also help you understand the
impact of associational thinking and incremental reading on creativity.
See: [incremental
writing](/wiki/Incremental_writing "Incremental writing")

### <span id="Brainstorming" class="mw-headline">Brainstorming</span>

There is a magic power in interaction with other brains. No reading and
no Google can replace another human being as a source of inspiration.
Discuss great ideas with your colleagues in relaxed one-to-one
encounters. Do it in a park or by the lakeside. Avoid distracting or
stressful surroundings such as offices, crowded places, etc. If your
inspirational brains are far away, use incremental brainstorming via
e-mail.

### <span id="Time-management" class="mw-headline">Time-management</span>

Time-management techniques help one maximize the efficient use of time.
**If you double the time spent on creative activities, you can increase
your lifetime output manifold**. Your efficiency may not double due to
the fatigue factor, but the results of creative output tend to cumulate,
consolidate, and self-amplify over time. Creativity is a great
investment that carries a huge compound interest that will produce a
snowballing effect throughout your life. Learn to use e-mail instead of
a phone or a car. This saves boatloads of time. Regular and repetitive
schedule works best for creativity. This is explained in [natural
creativity
cycle](/wiki/Natural_creativity_cycle "Natural creativity cycle"). If
you are flexible enough to plan to perfection, use
**[Plan](/wiki/Plan "Plan")** in
[SuperMemo](/wiki/SuperMemo "SuperMemo"). **Plan** will be of great help
in optimizing the realistic allocations of time to individual activities
in proportion to their priority. To enhance your time-management skills,
**Plan** will help you make an exact record of your work. You will see
how much time goes to waste or to low-priority activities. If you have
never done such an exercise before, you are bound to be surprised with
the amount of hidden potential. Time management will release that
potential. See: [Planning a perfect productive
day](/wiki/Planning_a_perfect_productive_day_without_stress "Planning a perfect productive day without stress").

### <span id="Study_great_people" class="mw-headline">Study great people</span>

Few things are as inspiring as the lives of the greatest individuals
that have walked the planet. Look for strategies that could be helpful
in your own efforts. Biographies of great people should make up a solid
portion of your [incremental
reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading") material

### <span id="Study_yourself" class="mw-headline">Study yourself</span>

Try to document how you got your best ideas in the past, and what serves
your brain best. You should focus on your optimum working environment,
mental state, and the methodology. Self-study is great for maintaining
health. If you use [incremental
writing](/wiki/Incremental_writing "Incremental writing") for note
taking and creative elaboration, you will realize that the incremental
learning process transforms your notes into a fountain of knowledge
about yourself.

### <span id="Work_your_social_skills" class="mw-headline">Work your social skills</span>

Do not neglect [skills needed to interact with other
people](/wiki/Optimal_socialization "Optimal socialization")! Teamwork
and cooperation can produce miracles. By alienating people you may block
your ideas from surfacing. Make friends, and avoid bad lot. Listen to
advice but politely refuse to follow it if you disagree. Never let other
people dominate your path in any other way than through a superior
advice. Good people often make little progress because they let others
abuse their politeness. The best way to learn to say *No* is to practice
that on a regular basis. Paradoxically, a month of isolation can help
you improve your efficient interaction with others. If you discover how
much can be done when you are the boss of your time, saying *no* will
become much easier.

### <span id="Slug_it_out" class="mw-headline">Slug it out</span>

If you need to solve a hard problem, allocate many hours to the goal.
For a period of time, try to forget about the whole world. Toss lots of
new inspirational knowledge into [incremental
reading](/wiki/Incremental_reading "Incremental reading"). Slug it out
as much as you can, and then sleep over it. [Learn, think, create,
sleep](/wiki/Natural_creativity_cycle "Natural creativity cycle"),
learn, think, create, sleep until the problem is solved. Remember that
your [memories are reorganized in
sleep](/wiki/Neural_optimization_in_sleep "Neural optimization in sleep").
This is why you will need plenty of sleep at the time of high creative
effort. Most likely, on one beautiful day, you will wake up with an idea
ready for consumption in your half-awoken mind. It is only the matter of
choosing the right problem to match your skills. The greatest scientists
and inventors had a good nose for spotting [solvable
problems](/wiki/Problem_valuation_network "Problem valuation network").
If the problem is solvable with your means, slugging it out in a smart
way will produce a satisfactory outcome. See: [How to solve any
problem?](/wiki/How_to_solve_any_problem%3F "How to solve any problem?")

Remember also that some things are not worth the fight: [The grind is
the glory](/wiki/The_grind_is_the_glory "The grind is the glory")

### <span id="Warm_family" class="mw-headline">Warm family</span>

To perpetuate genius, provide the best and most inspiring environment to
your own kids. Parental attention is highly correlated with a young
man's future achievements. History of the greatest minds shows that
loving, caring, inspiring, and warm family was the key to developing
brains that change the world. Remember that attention does not imply
limits on freedom. To maximize human potential, learning and development
must be [self-directed](/wiki/Free_learning "Free learning"). See also:
[Coercion in
learning](/wiki/Coercion_in_learning "Coercion in learning")

## <span id="Why_do_people_fail_my_prescription.3F"></span><span id="Why_do_people_fail_my_prescription?" class="mw-headline">Why do people fail my prescription?</span>

It has been two decades since I formulated the checklist above (2001). I
am proud to see many young lives thrive on my prescription. However, I
also see a great deal of failure. The checklist for failure is much
shorter. It basically boils down to two factors: <span
class="mark">stress and sleep</span>. With stress and bad sleep,
<a href="/wiki/Self-discipline" class="mw-redirect"
title="Self-discipline">self-discipline</a> collapses, and then ...
nothing happens. There is no progress towards greatness.

It is amazing how many people are enslaved by social pressure,
[behavioral systems](/wiki/Behavioral_system "Behavioral system"), and
lack of self-confidence. I strongly blame the education system for those
human weaknesses. See: [Schools violate the Genius
Checklist](/wiki/Schools_violate_the_Genius_Checklist "Schools violate the Genius Checklist")
and [100 bad habits learned at
school](/wiki/100_bad_habits_learned_at_school "100 bad habits learned at school").

<div class="bs-callout bs-callout-highlight" markdown="1">

When kids are deprived of freedom to make decisions in their most
formative years, they can be left scarred for life

</div>

If you believe I missed anything on my list, or you disagree with some
point, please
<a href="/wiki/Let_me_know" class="mw-redirect" title="Let me know">let
me know</a>.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="more" markdown="1">

For more texts on memory, learning, sleep, creativity, and problem
solving, see **[Super Memory
Guru](/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru "SuperMemo Guru")**

</div>

</div>

<div class="printfooter" markdown="1" nosnippet="">

Retrieved from "<a
href="https://supermemo.guru/index.php?title=Genius_checklist&amp;oldid=26086"
dir="ltr">https://supermemo.guru/index.php?title=Genius_checklist&amp;oldid=26086</a>"

</div>

</div>

<div id="catlinks" class="catlinks catlinks-allhidden" markdown="1"
mw="interface">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="mw-navigation" markdown="1">

## Navigation menu

<div id="mw-head" markdown="1">

### <span class="vector-menu-heading-label">Personal tools</span> [p-personal-label]

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

-   <span id="pt-login"><a
    href="/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&amp;returnto=Genius+checklist"
    accesskey="o"
    title="You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"><span>Log
    in</span></a></span>

</div>

<div id="left-navigation" markdown="1">

### <span class="vector-menu-heading-label">Namespaces</span> [p-namespaces-label]

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

-   <span
    id="ca-nstab-main"><a href="/wiki/Genius_checklist" accesskey="c"
    title="View the content page [c]"><span>Page</span></a></span>
-   <span id="ca-talk"><a
    href="/index.php?title=Talk:Genius_checklist&amp;action=edit&amp;redlink=1"
    rel="discussion" accesskey="t"
    title="Discussion about the content page (page does not exist) [t]"><span>Discussion</span></a></span>

</div>

<span class="vector-menu-heading-label">English</span>

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

</div>

</div>

<div id="right-navigation" markdown="1">

### <span class="vector-menu-heading-label">Views</span> [p-views-label]

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

-   <span id="ca-view">[Read](/wiki/Genius_checklist)</span>
-   <span
    id="ca-viewsource"><a href="/index.php?title=Genius_checklist&amp;action=edit"
    accesskey="e" title="This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"><span>View source</span></a></span>
-   <span
    id="ca-history"><a href="/index.php?title=Genius_checklist&amp;action=history"
    accesskey="h" title="Past revisions of this page [h]"><span>View
    history</span></a></span>

</div>

<span class="vector-menu-heading-label">More</span>

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

</div>

<div id="p-search"
class="vector-search-box-vue vector-search-box-show-thumbnail vector-search-box-auto-expand-width vector-search-box"
markdown="1" role="search">

<div markdown="1">

<div id="simpleSearch" class="vector-search-box-inner" markdown="1"
search-loc="header-navigation">

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="mw-panel" class="vector-legacy-sidebar" markdown="1">

<div id="p-logo" markdown="1" role="banner">

<a href="/wiki/Main_Page" class="mw-wiki-logo"
title="Visit the main page"></a>

</div>

### <span class="vector-menu-heading-label">Navigation</span> [p-navigation-label]

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

-   <span
    id="n-mainpage-description"><a href="/wiki/Main_Page" accesskey="z"
    title="Visit the main page [z]"><span>Main page</span></a></span>
-   <span
    id="n-recentchanges"><a href="/wiki/Special:RecentChanges" accesskey="r"
    title="A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"><span>Recent
    changes</span></a></span>
-   <span id="n-randompage"><a href="/wiki/Special:Random" accesskey="x"
    title="Load a random page [x]"><span>Random page</span></a></span>
-   <span id="n-help-mediawiki">[Help about
    MediaWiki](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Help:Contents)</span>

</div>

### <span class="vector-menu-heading-label">Tools</span> [p-tb-label]

<div class="vector-menu-content" markdown="1">

-   <span
    id="t-whatlinkshere"><a href="/wiki/Special:WhatLinksHere/Genius_checklist" accesskey="j"
    title="A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"><span>What links
    here</span></a></span>
-   <span
    id="t-recentchangeslinked"><a href="/wiki/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Genius_checklist"
    rel="nofollow" accesskey="k"
    title="Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"><span>Related
    changes</span></a></span>
-   <span
    id="t-specialpages"><a href="/wiki/Special:SpecialPages" accesskey="q"
    title="A list of all special pages [q]"><span>Special pages</span></a></span>
-   <span
    id="t-print"><a href="javascript:print();" rel="alternate" accesskey="p"
    title="Printable version of this page [p]"><span>Printable
    version</span></a></span>
-   <span id="t-permalink">[Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Genius_checklist&oldid=26086 "Permanent link to this revision of this page")</span>
-   <span id="t-info">[Page
    information](/index.php?title=Genius_checklist&action=info "More information about this page")</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

-   <span id="footer-info-lastmod">This page was last edited on 5
    December 2021, at 05:55.</span>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   <span id="footer-places-privacy">[Privacy
    policy](/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru:Privacy_policy)</span>
-   <span id="footer-places-about">[About
    supermemo.guru](/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru:About)</span>
-   <span
    id="footer-places-disclaimers">[Disclaimers](/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru:General_disclaimer)</span>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   <span
    id="footer-poweredbyico">[<img src="/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png"
    srcset="/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_132x47.png 1.5x, /resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_176x62.png 2x"
    loading="lazy" width="88" height="31" alt="Powered by MediaWiki" />](https://www.mediawiki.org/)</span>
